# Factor-Analysis-in-Material-Wellbeing-Survey

  Many people’s lives are greatly impacted by the public services and safety net programs available to us, and many of those services and programs are determined by state and federal policymakers. Many policy decisions are made with careful research and some more with anecdotal evidence and subjective bias towards what our policymakers believe are important factors in helping those in need. Safety net programs can of course have a large impact on financial stability for those in need but can also have a large impact on quality-of-life factors that are not as easy to quantify like mental wellbeing and other material wellbeing indicators. While these material wellbeing indicators are not as easy to quantify as other factors like income-based metrics they are still vitally important to our society as a whole and thus must be focused on to ensure our communities are getting the support they need in order to improve not only economic factors in their lives but material wellbeing factors as well. Material wellbeing includes factors such as mental wellbeing, how secure a person feels for the future, and anxiety about their children’s education that can have an enormous impact on the overall wellbeing of our communities. 
	Material wellbeing metrics can be gathered and estimated through surveys that ask people to report on different factors in their lives regarding their financial stability, what programs they currently receive aid from, and what they perceive their material wellbeing to be. Giving this information, feature selection can help us determine what factors in a person’s life are the most important to promoting good mental wellbeing. The goal is to identify areas of life which have the greatest impact on our communities’ wellbeing and hopefully gain insight on factors that may be more nuanced than simply providing more financial aid. This project aims to find out more about the factors in community members lives that lead to better wellbeing like access to libraries, access to public parks, childcare, pollution, transportation, and other things that could give us and policymakers greater insight into the most important areas in which to promote safety net programs in order to make our communities healthier and happier. 

Data:

  The dataset for this project is provided by the Urban Institute, a Washington DC based think tank that researches economics and social policy. The Urban Institute administered a survey as part of their “From Safety Net to Solid Ground Initiative” called the “Well Being and Basic Needs Survey” (Zuckerman, 2020). The survey is a nationally representative survey consisting of adults ages 18 to 64 and covers topics related to health, material hardship, and individual and family well-being, as well as the interaction of adults and their families with major safety net programs. The survey focuses on health status, health care, housing and neighborhoods, income, program participation in programs like Medicaid and Supplemental Nutrition Assistance, and financial security. The dataset includes 7,587 responses and 284 factors. Each factor is a response to a survey question and include continuous responses as well as many discrete and binary factors in which participants respond to yes/no questions or give their answer as a rank on a scale. 
	Urban Institute is the author of the dataset and has provided it to the public through their data catalog online in which one can download it through the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR). ICPSR has restricted certain variables from the publicly available dataset for confidentiality. 

Methodology:

The dataset contains a relatively large amount of features (284), the primary motivation for this project is to perform feature selection and gain insights into the most important variables that predict general wellbeing. Feature selection is typically used to simplify models, remove redundant or irrelevant features, and improve computational efficiency when developing a predictive model. The following study starts by creating a few linear regression models that predict features such as “Q27” of the dataset which corresponds to question 27 of the survey, “In general, would you say your health is:“, on a scale from poor to excellent and “Q30_4” which asks how “During the past 30 days, about how often did you feel so sad that nothing could cheer you up?” Principal component analysis is performed on the dataset to reduce dimensionality for predicting some of the material wellbeing features to see which factors are the largest sources of variation. The data is all mostly in the same units besides a few columns that include weight and income.
	Feature selection is then performed on the predictive models. Techniques include Lasso Regression, Elastic Net Regression, and Classification and Regression Trees. 

Data Preparation and Exploratory Analysis:

   The study begins with standardizing the data because the scales of the data vary by variable. This data set contains a significant amount of missing data in certain variables. Several variables represent answers to questions in the survey that are contingent on the response to a previous question, and thus many of these such questions don’t have recorded responses. Columns which have more than 5% of data missing (about 380 observations) are removed. This results in the removal of 88 columns, leaving 197 variables containing less than 5% missing data.
	Most functions in the scikit-learn library require complete data sets. Only about 6% of the remaining observations contain any missing data between all the variables after the first 88 columns were removed. Because of this relatively low amount of missing data, observations where values in any of the variables are missing are discarded. This results in an example of Complete Case Analysis which is advantageous in that by not imputing missing data it is preserving the distribution of variables, provided the data is missing at random and only a small proportion of the data is missing. This complete case now includes 7,103 observations and 197 features.
	The data is randomly split into train and test sets for predictive models. 
	Histograms are used to get an initial sense of the distributions of some of the variables.
